A Song to Introduce the Unmistaken View of the Great Perfection

by Khenpo Gangshar

Placing my head at the feet of the Dharma King, I offer homage:Bless me that I might see natural
luminosity.

Hey, you of great fortune!

Sit without moving,
like a tent peg driven into hard earth!

Gaze with your eyes neither open nor closed,
like the eyes of a deity in a fresco!

And let your mind settle, loose and relaxed,like a woollen blanket spread out on the ground…


At times like these, while resting in the utter brilliance that is the space beyond thought,
which may be likened to a cloudless sky, you will experience unimpeded translucence like
a faultless crystal.

This is none other than the view of the ultimate, the luminous Great Perfection. Resting in
equipoise within the pure luminosity, vividly clear like the sky, dullness and agitation are
naturally voided and do not arise anew – a faultless, brilliantly clear non-conceptual
meditation. When thought arises, be it good or bad, it is recognized for what it is and will
not disturb. Focus upon this method and view your genuine nature; effortless, it arises
by relaxing into the expanse, and thoughts are pacified on their own ground.

When you are able to practice for longer periods, it can be like, for example, when muddy water
is stirred up and then allowed to settle – the innate lucidity of the water becomes clearer.
Similarly, when myriad appearances arise and are realized to be like reflections, they
cause the natural clarity of mind itself to become ever clearer. This in turn leads to
the effortless arising of various qualities, such as the various types of clairvoyance and
so on.

Should even the Great Master of Oḍḍiyāna appear before you, he’d have nothing greater than this
to say on the view of the Great Perfection.

Should even Longchen Rabjam appear before you, he’d have nothing greater to teach you on the
practice of taking thought as the path.

Should even the twenty-five exalted disciples appear before you, they’d have nothing greater
to say concerning this practice.

As for myself, a yogin, this is my practice, and I have no greater meditation instruction to
offer you.

You may analyze meticulously, but when a wind blows it naturally disperses the clouds and the
sky can be seen. Endeavour to see empty clarity, mind itself, in the same way – there is
nothing greater than this understanding. If you don’t stir up the silt, the water will remain
clear; as such, don’t analyze. Simply rest without contrivance and you will come to see
the emptiness of mind itself. There is nothing greater to see than this!

There are many views, but that of the emptiness of mind itself, devoid of all grasping, is the
unmistaken view of the Great Perfection. When death comes to yogis of this method they
are able to seize the clear light of death.

Hearing about it is beneficial, but I pray the actual experience of clear light will become
evident.

Written by the old ignoramus, Gangshar Wangpo. May it prove meaningful!

| Translated by Sean Price, 2015