A Song of Amazement Inspired by Practice Experience

by Sera Khandro

At the age of twenty-nine I was with my guru at the isolated retreat of Nyimalung in Amdo when
a magical display of formless divine spirits and demons arose in my perception. As these
beings displayed various behaviors to me, I told them, “You should respect your master as
divine, as I have showed you the path.”

They said, “If you are a yoginī, what are you doing here? It is good to go to an isolated retreat.”

I replied, “I am in an isolated retreat.”

Then they said, “How is your isolated retreat? If we develop devotion, what kind of blessings
will there be? Please tell us.”

“In my isolated mountain retreat of limitless appearances,remaining in the practice where the
world and beyond arise as ornaments,I sustained the fundamental nature, free from fixating
on hope and fear.Gazing upon my own true face – innate luminosity –I possess the instructions
on self-liberation of appearances.

In my isolated mountain retreat of self-luminous detachment,resting in the practice of luminosity
without clinging,I sustained the fundamental nature of self-emergent simplicity.Gazing
upon my own true face – carefree openness –I have the teachings on self-liberation of destructive
emotions.

In my isolated mountain retreat of self-emergent non-conceptuality,remaining in the practice
of self-liberation of conditioned appearances,I sustained the fundamental nature of non-dual
hope and fear.Encountering the wisdom of natural self-liberation,I hold the instructions
for the self-release of whatever arises.

In my isolated mountain retreat devoid of fixation on hope and fear,resting in the practice
of self-liberating destructive emotionsI sustained the fundamental nature of the perfect on-going
state of the three kāyas.Gazing upon my own true nature – effortless dharmakāya –I
possess the instructions on the primordial liberation of cyclic existence and quiescence.


I have attained the fourfold assurance of freedom from abandonment and attainment,and am liberated
inseparably with ever-excellent great bliss.This is the proper way a practitioner pursues
isolated mountain retreat!

Hey, hey!Just sleeping in the mountains is not being in an isolated mountain retreat;Wild animals
all sleep in the mountains.Although far from butchers who kill,they lack a single source
of protection or hope.Reflecting on this makes me sad!

If you do not pray with devotion to the wish-fulfilling master,the requisite and desired accomplishments
will not come,so diligently cultivate a mind filled with devotion.

If you do not give rise to the four powers of devotion,toward the master, the buddha of the
three times,the blessings of the wisdom mind transmission will not enter you,so diligently
give rise to devotion.

If you do not serve the master’s enlightened body with devotion,your mind will not be liberated
by blessings,so diligently bring forth this devoted mind.

From the maṇḍala of the master’s enlightened speech,when the nectar of pith instructions is
bestowed,if one-pointed devotion does not arise,it will be difficult to tame a discursive
mind like mine,so diligently cultivate devotion.

From the maṇḍala of the master’s enlightened heart,the entrance to the profound teachings of
the secret treasury is bestowed.If you are not inspired with devotion,it is impossible for
the accomplishments of your spiritual heritage to well forth,so definitely give rise to
devotion.

If you do not respectfully and in the threefold mannerplease the master who is endowed with
the three kindnesses,you will lack even an atom’s worth of the essence of generation, recitation
and perfection practice,so diligently cultivate this devoted mind.

The guru is the actual buddha of the three times,whose awakened mind is endowed with the wisdom
of twofold omniscience.His compassion is neither near nor far,but if you do not pray with
devotion,it is difficult to be held by his compassion which can lead you,so definitely
inspire yourself with devotion.

Respectfully supplicating the master enables usTo cast away self-cherishing pride.Devotedly
praying to our masters enables usTo discard the aggression that comes from attachment and
aversion.Respectfully supplicating the master enables usTo cast away jealousy coming from
competitiveness.Devotedly praying to our masters enables usTo discard wrong views coming from
our disturbing emotions.

My actual master is ever-excellent Padmasmabhava,the supreme representative of the victorious
ones of the three times.From the sublime guide Vimaraśmi (Drimé Özer), I pray never to be
apart.He transferred the blessings of the wisdom mind transmission to meAnd the knots of
my dualistic fixation released into basic space,So I see the wisdom of wind-mind mastery.Without
the duality of buddha and sentient being,pervading in the expanse of the primordially
liberated dharmakāya,various manifestations arise as the ornaments of space.The core falsities
of dualistic hope and fear exhausted,gods and demons arise non-dual as the magical
display of my mind.I, the yoginiī, am not afraid of the magical displays of illusion –I
am a fearless vajra yoginī!I have the instructions to sever the root of the four māras.Externally,
I sever the magical display of illusory appearancesinto the great nonexistence of
hope and fear.Internally, I sever the root of attachment – self-cherishing –into the primordially
liberated expanse of non-attachment.I sever the all-ground – the gathering of body
and mind –with the sword of triple wisdom.Secretly, I sever concepts based on five poisonsinto
the continuum of self-liberated disturbing emotions.Into the expanse of the profound
wisdom intent of Pacification,I sever all phenomena of the world and beyond, non-dual.

This root of attachment to confused appearances stemming from disturbing emotions,liberates
in the dharmadhātu five-wisdom’s own expanse,the ground of the great baseless wisdom mind
expanse.I sever into the space of dharmakāya evenness with PHAṬ!“PHA” cuts the root of confused
dualistic fixation,and is thoroughly understood in all meanings of the pāramitās.“Ṭ”
is the perfection of non-dual saṃsāra and quiescence in the groundand liberates non-dual
avoidance and acceptance into the ever excellent dharmakāya.May we attain the state unified
with Vajradhara!”

Thus I sang, and they did prostrations and circumambulations and returned to their places.

Sukha Vajra (Dewé Dorje) put into words a visionary display.

| Translated by Christina Monson, 2015.