A Song of Prayer to Jamyang Loter Wangpo
by Khenpo Shenpen Nangwa

kyemé chöying kyi kha la
In the unborn space of dharmadhātu
gakmé tukjé yi özer
Light rays of compassion are unceasing.
marik münsel gyi nyishyön
A new sun that banishes the darkness of unknowing,
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

nga dö drowa yi nang ngor
In the perception of beings in this age of fivefold degeneration,
tamal zakché kyi pungpo
You appeared with ordinary, tainted aggregates.
rang ngor trul zé kyi naljor
But you are a yogi for whom delusion has ended,
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

tsul tong jipa yi lo ngor
To childish beings of limited capacity
jikten milü su nang yang
You appear in a mundane human form,
gongpa sangye dang nyampé
Yet your realization matches that of a buddha—
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

namdak tsultrim kyi mik bu
You are a leader pure in ethical discipline
tek sum damchö kyi dren jé
With the vision of the noble Dharma of the three vehicles,
tarpé lam tön gyi shenyen
A guide revealing the way to liberation—
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

ngön mön dübab kyi tönpa
Teacher for whom past aspirations have matured,
kalzang lobma yi dren chok
Supreme guide for fortunate disciples,
sang chen gyüdé yi ngadak
Sovereign of the great secret classes of tantra—
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

sar nying kater gyi damchö
You are the master of all the noble Dharma teachings
kün gyi dakpo ru shyukpa
Of the New and Old traditions, of kama and of terma,
dorjé chang wang gi shyal kyin
A representative of the mighty Vajradhara—
drinchen lama dé khyen no
O gracious guru, care for me!

min jé wangkur gyi bum zang
Like an excellent vase that bestows ripening empowerments,
drol jé mengak gi depön
A leader whose pith instructions bring about liberation,
drimé gyalten gyi sokshing
Life-pillar of the flawless teachings of the victorious ones,
lo ter wangpo dé khyen no
Loter Wangpo, ‘Lord of the Treasury of Intelligence’, care for me!

lek jé sönam kyi rimo
Like a picture of well-performed meritorious deeds,
döntün mönlam gyi driwé
Drawn with aspirations that accord with reality,
khyö shyal pemo yi zé'u dru
Your face, like the heart of a lotus flower,
mik gi dütsi ru gyur song
Appeared as ambrosia for the eyes.

ösal sharchok kyi tiklé
As the eastern orb of clear light
tenpé petsal du chepé
Shines on the lotus grove of the teachings,
gokmé trinlé kyi nangwé
May the light of unceasing enlightened activity
sa sum gelek rang dzö chik
Bring virtue and goodness to the three worlds!

gongpa yeshe kyi longchen
In the vast expanse of wisdom realization,
mishik ö nga yi tsombu
May the cluster of indestructible five-coloured light,
pomé dorjé yi ku chok
Arise as the vajra body beyond transference,
dorjé chödün du shok chik
Complete with the seven vajra qualities!

Shenpen Nangwa wrote this song of supplication to the noble guru Jamyang Loter Wangpo in response
to one with eager aspiration. May it bring virtue and goodness!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019.

Source: gzhan phan chos kyi snang ba. rje btsun bla ma thams cad mkhyen gzigs gzhan phan chos
kyi snang ba'i mnyam bzhes rtogs mgur skor. Dar-rtse-mdo, 1993, pp. 263–264 (16a–16b)

Version: 1.2-20220112