Advice to Myself Exposing Hidden Flaws

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Father, noble guru, embodiment of all sources of refuge, care for me!

I’ve won an exceptional human form with the freedoms and advantages,But, on account of my bad
karma, I’m attached to the experiences of this life,My character is wicked, inferior, mischievous
and inflexible,And my mind is stricken as if by some chronic disease.

Nowadays, I have little opportunity to meet directlyThe authentic guru, who is my only true
father,And although I’ve beheld a mass of dharma instructions,I’ve failed to apply them to
my mind, like a dog presented with grass.

Even though this child has set his sights high on liberation,He’s caught in the noose of afflictions
such as desire,And his head is brought low as if he’s been anchored to the hells—Such
is the price for having borne anger and resentment.

Although the authentic noble guru has partially revealedThe child-like wisdom of pure awareness,
mind’s true nature,As I’ve not made it familiar to the point that it’s instinctive, [1]It’s
like a ray of sunshine in thick cloud—such a pity!

As the demon, the lord of death, holds me in his angry stareAnd the black noose of evil karma
tightens around my neckIt’s almost time for his weapon, the axe, to cut my vital artery—Three
more steps and the lord of death will have me in his grasp.

When I leave behind the lifeless corpse of the four elementsAnd continue on my way, companionless
and alone,I’ll have no other guardian or defender but you,Compassionate guru, unrivalled
protector to whom I pray.

As I follow in the wake of my positive and negative deeds,I’ll have amassed no more than a few
wholesome actions,But I’ll have gathered a vast mountain of misdeeds,And, try as I might,
there’ll be no way to leave them all behind.

When the results of these actions ripen directly,There’ll not be a single moment of respite,No
other option but to reap the fruits of my own deeds.At that time, as I cry out in anguish—Kyehü!
Kyehü!—My future mind will surely feel great remorse.

Exert yourself in the Dharma, therefore, Lodrö,Before you must bear the burden of your misdeeds.Don’t
squander this freedom while you have the chance,O child, but apply your mind to
the cultivation of virtue.

I passed on these words of advice to myself on the second day of the Miracles Month during the
Snake year, when my feelings alternated between joy and sadness.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2021.