Divine Music
Words of Encouragement for the Authentic Path
by Khenpo Shenpen Nangwa

rik sum sempé dul shying gangri jong
Guardians of this land of snowy peaks, the arena of bodhisattvas of the three families,
kyong dzé khen lob trulpé lo pen dang
Abbot and master, and emanated translators and paṇḍitas,
do ngak tenpé sokshing jinyepa
And all the life-pillars of the teachings of sūtra and mantra,
jön dang jön gyur kün la chaktsal lo
To all who have come and who are yet to come, I pay homage!

khyepar khorlo sum gyi dzetrin gyi
In particular, those who through the three spheres of activity
sangye tenpé jawa da dralwa
Were unparalleled in their work for the Buddhist teachings,
sang chen lam gyi drubpé sar shekpé
And who reached accomplishment through the great secret path:
jetsün gongma nga yi dak gyü kyong
Five venerable forefathers, protect and nurture my mind!

dorjé chang gi shyallung dütsi chu
Let the river of elixir that is the oral transmission from Vajradhara,
tsema sum gyi nyer khé lek drangpé
Carefully channeled through the three forms of validity1
sung ngak lobshé mengak gyü dangché
As private instructions, pith instructions and tantras
lamé drin gyi sem kyi yol gor khyil
Collect, through the guru’s kindness, in the vessel of my mind.

tserab ngön gyi jangpa chung na yang
Although my training in former lives was meagre,
tsé dir geweshé kyi ring kyangpé
Still, through the teacher’s persistent care in this life,
chö dang chö min jepé lo mik dang
I acquired the capacity to discern Dharma from non-Dharma,
yangdak chö la möpé lodrö tob
And the intelligence to seek out genuine teachings.

lha dang lamé tukjé ö nang gi
Through the brilliant light of the deity and guru’s compassion,
münpar drönmé tekpa jishyin du
As if a lamp had been held aloft in the darkness,
sang chen lamdré mengak dön dang tré
I encountered the instructions of the great secret Path With Its Fruit,
gekmé tendrel lekpé lam du drik
And circumstances fell into place positively and without hindrance.

tsur tong nyé dang kurti go kal yang
If the narrow-minded regard even a shred of gain and honour
lha yi ngödrub nyi du tajé na
As a form of blessing from the gods,
tsekmé dorjé lamzang la chöpa
Then practising this excellent vajra path without difficulty
lha yi ngödrub namyang nyönpamé
Surely cannot be anything other than divine advantage!

ema sang chen ngagyur chö la shyuk
Ema! I entered into the Dharma of the Ancient Translations, the Great Secret,
pakyul khepé shyung la chungzé jang
And learned a little of the works of scholars from the noble land.
chok shyen mepé sem kyi tak jepé
Through investigating with a mind free from partiality
palden sakyé chö la yiché kyé
I developed trust in the glorious Sakya teachings.

dadung du yang gyalwé tenpa la
Still, as I continue to practise the teachings of the victorious buddhas
nga khyö mepé sem kyi chö jé na
With a mind that is free from notions of ‘I’ or ‘you’,
ying né sé ché gyalwé jin tu yi
May the buddhas and their heirs grant their blessings and strength from basic space,
dreltsé dön dang denpar jingyi lob
So that all my connections may become meaningful!

kyé ho drok dak pakpé yul shyepa
Kyeho! Friends, in the country known as the land of the āryas,
yangdak chö kyi jungné na lendra
At Nālandā, the source of authentic Dharma,
denö dzinpa bum gyi tsukgyen du
The crown ornament of a hundred thousand piṭaka-holders
drakpé lobpön palden chökyong yin
Was the renowned master Śrī Dharmapāla.2

gang dé yeshe ku yi ngönsum du
In his wisdom form he guided directly
jesu zungwa tsé chen sakyapa
The great benevolent Sakya master,
jetsün ché sok tö ché dulja la
Who cared for his own disciples, including the reverend brothers,3
lekpar tsalwa gyé dor tsawé gyü
Perfectly transmitting the Hevajra root tantra.

di ni palden sakyé ta drub dang
As for this view and the tenets of the glorious Sakya,
lam dü tün shyir gompé kyedzok sok
As well as the generation and perfection cultivated in four sessions for the Time of the Path—4
shé dang drubpa kün gyi khung yinpé
These are the source of all teaching and accomplishment.
sok gi chir yang dorwar mi ja o
Even at the cost of one’s life, therefore, they must never be forsaken.

bi rupa yi mengak jishyin du
Studying this, the king of tantras,
jetsün ché kyi lek shetsul shyi yi
Through the fine explanations of the venerable brothers
gyü gyal di la jangpa jepa na
And according to Virūpa’s pith instructions,
gyatrak shyung la chikchar jangpar gyur
Is akin to studying a hundred scriptures all at once.

yang chik sön dang chö tün drokpo dak
Listen again, my companions in the Dharma,
chung ngü dü né lünpö jé kyé na
It must be true that someone who follows a fool from a young age
chö la möpa mepa den du chuk
Will lack trust in the Dharma.
khepé jesu kyepa di la gong
Consider this one who has followed the learned!

dani nyurdu tsönpa ma jé na
Now, unless you exert yourself swiftly,
gyalten nyima nub kyi ri la lhung
The sun of the Buddhist teachings will set beyond the western peaks,
tendzin kyebü mik bu torwa na
And when the holders of the teachings, guides to beings, disappear,
lam min yangsar chenpar gyur taré
There will be a risk of straying onto false paths and falling into the abyss.

jikten jawa shi yang zinpamé
There is no end to worldly activity, even in death.
zinmé mitsé dawé tsul la tö
Just look at how we spend our human lives relentlessly.
chikyang dren na shyung zang didak la
However much you think about it, it is only reasonable
nyintsen yengwa pang té tsönpar rik
That you cast aside distraction and apply yourself to these excellent works day and night.

sangja nangja di jé di jé ché
‘I’ll do this tomorrow, that the day after, and after that, this.’—
drubmé lé la namyang zinpamé
With such thoughts unproductive activity never ends.
dewé rangwang rang gi dzin jé né
Having taken control of your own agenda, then,
shyung zang di la lobpar mi jé dam
Will you not study this excellent scripture?

rang gi rangnyi chöpar mi jé na
Unless you seek to bring about your own improvement,
pama yin kyang chö la kulwamé
Even your own parents could never bring you to the Dharma.
khyepar lung gi tenpa nyam mepé
And since the scriptural teachings are especially weak,
töpé chö la kulwa su yangmé
No one will encourage you to pursue Dharma study.

shintu tré ka dorjé tekpé lam
The path of the vajra vehicle is rarely encountered.
tsik tsam töpé kalpar sakpé drib
Even hearing its words dispels age-old obscurations,
bamo nyizer tré shyin dak jepé
Just as the rays of the sun melt away the frost.
gyü gyal di la tsönpar chikyang kul
Motivate yourself however you can and apply yourself to this king of tantras!

deké trö ö chi kyi sol jé kyang
You might suggest that what I have said deserves elaboration,
senpar jepamé na jöpé chi
But what would be the point of further remarks if no one is listening?
deta na ang rang lo gyu mepé
Without betraying my own mind, therefore,
rang gi netsul tsam shyik shyüpa lak
I offer this simply as an account of my own situation.

diru lhaksam dakpé jöpé gé
Through the virtue of stating this with pure intention,
gyalten chi dang nyimé kyé dorjé
May the teaching and practice of Buddhadharma in general
shé dang drubpé jikten nang jé né
And of the non-dual Hevajra in particular illumine the world
chimé mu tar taktu nepar shok
And continue evermore unto the most distant limits of time.

These personal ideas, offered informally to Dharma companions, were written by Shenpen Nangwa.
May they bring virtue and excellence!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019. With thanks to Alak Zenkar Rinpoche for kindly clarifying
difficult points.

Source: gzhan phan chos kyi snang ba. "yang dag lam la bskul ba'i gtam lha'i rol mo" in zhal
gdams 'bel gtam gyi skor. Rewalsar, Distt. Mandi, H.P., India: Zigar Drukpa Kargyud Institute,
1985, pp. 30–33

Version: 1.2-20220112
↑ i.e., valid perception, inference and scriptural authority.↑ i.e., Virūpa.↑ i.e., Sonam Tsemo
(1142–1182) and Drakpa Gyaltsen (1147–1216).↑ Time of the Path (lam dus) is the common
name for daily Hevajra practice.