Lightning Bands of Compassion

A Song of Lament for Khenchen Kunzang Palden Tupten Chökyi Drakpa

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti!Heart-son of the guru who held Samantabhadra’s lineage,Glorious one who held the life-vein
of the Ancient Translation teachings,Wise, loving and powerful Tupten Chökyi Drakpa,To
you I pray: look upon me with love and compassion.

Now, when the teachings of the omniscient ŚākyaAnd their essence, the vajra vehicle of the Ancient
Translations,Are being corrupted by the stains of interpolation,Reverend teacher, how
can you forsake us with your compassion?

Great beings are disappearing like the sun and moon setting over western peaks,And the corrupting
influence of wrong views is on the rise.Lord of Dharma, you are like a sovereign among
the constellations,But now that you have passed into the absolute sphere, we are bereft.


Like orphans left behind by their mothers,We have no refuge or protector and are assailed by
suffering.Consider us well, O protector, with your wisdom and love,And manifest, I beseech
you, in a wondrous emanation.

In a form that has the splendour of a deathless vajra,Shine as resplendently as the moon amidst
the stars.And with the three ways of the learned[1] and qualities of an adept,Cause the
water-lily of the Ancient Translation teachings to bloom.

For us, hereafter in all our lives to comeMay we be sustained by the teachings of this supreme
guide and king of Dharma.May we touch our heads at the dust before your feet,And obtain
the supreme essential realization of his secret wisdom mind.

When a letter arrived on the eighth day of the eleventh month to say that the great khenpo of
unparalleled kindness had passed into the dharmadhātu at dawn on the twenty-seventh day
of the tenth month of the Water Sheep year,[2] I, the devoted student Jamyang Lodrö Gyatso
composed this prayer with single-pointed devotion right away during my session of recitation.
I pray that all the vidyādhara gurus of the three transmissions grant their blessings
so that it is fulfilled entirely.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.

i.e., teaching, debate and composition.  ↩


This corresponds to 24 December 1943.  ↩