Nectar of the Heart

An Experiential Song of Parting from the Four Attachments

by Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo

Through the blessings of the noble Guru Mañjughoṣa,May all beings throughout the universe practise
the sacred Dharma,Progress along the way, and overcome confusions on the path,And may
all deluded perceptions arise as all-pervading space!

Although we have gained this rare support, the freedoms and advantages so hard to find,If we
are attached to this life, we are not sincere practitioners of Dharma,And since things last
but a moment and are bound to be destroyed,Let us exert ourselves in practising virtue
and avoiding harm.

Although our minds may be turned towards the sacred Dharma,If we are attached to the three realms
of saṃsāra we lack renunciation.So let us develop a genuine and uncontrived wish to
escapeFrom this cycle of existence which is by its nature suffering.

Although we might pursue mere peace and happiness for ourselves,If we are attached to our own
self-interest, we lack bodhicitta.So, since all beings have been our kind mothers and fathers,Let
us train our minds in love, compassion and bodhicitta.

Although we might be well trained in relative bodhicitta,If there is grasping in our perception,
it means we lack the view.Therefore, in order that we may cut through the view of self,Let
us rest in all-pervading space, beyond conceptual constructs.

Through the merit of this spontaneous song of whatever came to mind,Gathering and distilling
the advice given by the venerable MañjughoṣaTo the glorious and benevolent one, the great
Kunga Nyingpo,May all sentient beings, my past mothers, swiftly attain awakening!

This was written by the carefree wanderer Jamyang Khyentse Wangpo in the Dharma centre of glorious
Sakya, the source of plentiful precious qualities, in the very place where noble Mañjughoṣa
appeared to the great Sakyapa lama and bestowed this teaching, the cave of Rangjung
Dorje’i Drak.

Sarva mangalam! May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2007.