Rain of Accomplishments
A Song that Incorporates the Four Mindfulnesses from an Instruction on the View of the Middle
Way
by the Seventh Dalai Lama, Kalzang Gyatso

tabshé zungjuk gyurmé kyi den teng na
Upon a seat of the unchanging union of method and wisdom,
kyab kün ngowo drinchen gyi lama shyuk
Sits the gracious guru, embodiment of all sources of refuge—
pang tok dzokpé sangye shik dé na da
A buddha, perfect in abandonment and realization, right there.
kyön tok pang né daknang gi solwa tob
Abandoning all critical ideas, supplicate him or her with pure perception.
rangsem gya yen duma jok mögü kyi ngang du shyok
Without allowing the mind to wander, remain in a state of devotion.
drenpa jemé du jé né mögü kyi ngang du zung
Without losing mindfulness, remain in a state of devotion.

khorwa tamé dukngal gyi tsönra na
Within the prison of suffering in saṃsāra that is without end,
dewé pongpé rik druk gi semchen khyam
The six classes of beings wander, bereft of happiness—
drin gyi kyangpé pama nam dé na da
Your very own parents, who nurtured you with such care, right there.
chakdang pang né chedzin dang nyingjé gom
Abandoning attachment and aversion, meditate on cherishing others and compassion.
rangsem gya yen duma jok nyingjé yi ngang du shyok
Without allowing the mind to wander, remain in a state of compassion.
drenpa jemé du jé né nyingjé yi ngang du zung
Without losing mindfulness, remain in a state of compassion.

kyi du tsorwa dechen gyi shyalyé na
Within the celestial palace of great bliss, delightful to experience,
pung kham dakpa rang lü kyi lha ku shyuk
The divine body of your own pure aggregates and constituents abides—
ku sum yermé yidam shyik dé na da
The yidam deity, in whom the three kāyas are inseparable, right there.
palpar ma dzin ngagyal dang sal nang jong
Without clinging to ordinariness, practise divine pride and vivid appearance.
rangsem gya yen duma jok zabsal gyi ngang du shyok
Without allowing the mind to wander, remain in a state of profound clarity.
drenpa jemé du jé né zabsal gyi ngang du zung
Without losing mindfulness, remain in a state of profound clarity.

nang shying sipa sheja yi kyilkhor na
The sky of ultimate luminosity, the nature of phenomena,
chönyi döndam ösal gyi namkhé khyab
Pervades the maṇḍala of knowable things, whatever appears and exists—
jödral dön gyi neluk shik dé na da
The way things actually abide, beyond expression, right there.
löjé pang né tong sang gi ngowor tö
Abandoning mental fabrication, look into the essence of empty clarity.
rangsem gya yen duma jok chönyi kyi ngang du shyok
Without allowing the mind to wander, remain in a state of dharmatā.
drenpa jemé du jé né chönyi kyi ngang du zung
Without losing mindfulness, remain in a state of dharmatā.

nangwa natsok tsok druk gi shyido na
At the crossroads of the six collections of consciousness with all their various appearances,
shyi tsa dralwé nyi chö kyi za zi tong
The haze of dualistic phenomena lacking basis or origin can be seen—
lu dri gyumé temo shyik dé na da
A deceptive, illusory spectacle, right there.
den no ma nyam tongnyi kyi ngowor tö
Without thinking of it as real, look into the essence of emptiness.
rangsem gya yen duma jok nangtong gi ngang du shyok
Without allowing the mind to wander, remain in a state of appearance and emptiness.
drenpa jemé du jé né nangtong gi ngang du zung
Without losing mindfulness, remain in a state of appearance and emptiness.

Thus, so that I and others may become habituated to the correct view, I, Lobzang Kalzang Gyatso,
a monk-follower of Śākyamuni, composed this song, which incorporates the instruction
on the view of fourfold mindfulness, a special instruction that Lord Mañjuśrī gave directly
to the great dharma-king Tsongkhapa,

| Translated by Sean Price and Adam Pearcey, 2018.