The Sound of the Divine Drum: Advice at a Time of Victory
by Khenchen Jigme Phuntsok

nying dab gyé pemé zeudru la
Ever-youthful and glorious Mañjuśrī,
gön gyal kun yeshé chik dü ku
Embodiment of all the victorious buddhas’ wisdom,
jé jampal shyönnu tak shyuk né
Remain forever upon the eight-petalled lotus in my heart,
tam mé tsé dro la menpar dzö
And make whatever I say a source of healing for all beings!

lam yang zab ösal nyingpo yi
Simply to hear the words of the essence of clear light,
tsik töpé si tsa hrulpor ché
The most profound of paths, is to undermine saṃsāric existence,
né gom na dawa druk gi drol
While meditation on its key points brings liberation in a mere six months—
di khona nying gi pal beur tim
So, let this alone penetrate into the glorious knot of your heart.

dön di dang trepé kalzang tso
For fortunate ones to encounter this teaching
ngön kal mang tsok sak lak jé té
Is a sign of having gathered merit over many aeons in the past,
pal kuntu zang dang kalwa nyam
And provides an opportunity equal to that of Samantabhadra—
tuk gawar gyi shik nying drok nam
So rejoice, my dear heart-friends!

né jik rung khorwé semchen nam
To bring relief to beings throughout saṃsāra’s terrible realms
ten dé yi sa la uk yung chir
By leading them to a state of lasting happiness,
shyen pen gyi sam chö khur du shyé
Take on the task of helping others in thought and deed,
rang ché dzin halé zé shyin dor
And avoid self-cherishing as if it were food laced with poison!

men ngendrö go par di yi gok
It is this that closes the door to the lower realms below,
gong tori dé pal di yi dren
That leads to the blissful splendour of the higher realms above,
tar tarpé kam sar di yi chin
And that ultimately brings us to the dry land of liberation—
lo ma mang nyam shyé di la dzö
Without undue thought then, put this into practice!

yul khorwé puntsok tadak la
Towards all the luxuries and enjoyments of saṃsāra,
yi mönpé sampa lhöpö ngang
Let your desires and aspirations subside in relaxation,
to lhar ché drowé chödong chok
And prize pure dharma discipline as the supreme adornment,
chö dul trim gyen gyi chok tu zung
The greatest source of reverence for gods and other beings alike.

chir ngön to ngé lek tadak gi
From this derives all the joys and splendours
dé pal kun di la ten né jung
Of the higher realms and definitive goodness;
di nyam na ngen dro ta mé khyam
While transgressions mean wandering endlessly in the lower realms,
rang gowo ma khor lang dor dzö
So do not deceive yourself, but adopt and avoid actions in the proper way!

dü kuntu sam chö drok dang tün
Always be in harmony with friends in attitude and deeds,
gyü drang shying sampa kar la tsön
And exert yourself in cultivating sincerity and pure motivation;
puk rang dön gya cher drup dö kyang
Even if you seek your own best interest in the long term,
tsul shyen pen chepa mengak yin
The method is still to benefit others—this is the instruction.

dön di la mi chö tsang ma zer
This advice encapsulates the essence of the rules of pure human conduct,
gön dü sum gyalwé tabkhé lam
The skilful methods of the buddhas of past, present and future,
chö du ngö shyi yi nyingkhu yin
And the four means of attracting others,
di ma jé ma jé lob tsok nam
So, my disciples, never ever forget this!

tam di mé gewé drowa kun
Through the virtue of pronouncing this advice,
né khorwé yang sa lé drol shying
May all beings be freed from saṃsāra’s abyss,
bu kalden gawé sö su gyur
May fortunate disciples be sustained with joy
nub dé den shying du kyewar shok
And reborn in the blissful pure land to the west!

I, Ngawang Lodrö Tsungmé, sang these words of advice before an assembly of almost five thousand
saṅgha members on the ninth day of the eighth month of the Fire Mouse year during the
seventeenth calendrical cycle (21 September 1996), when we, the teacher and disciples, were
celebrating victory over outer, inner and secret obstacles. May virtue abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2018.