The Song of the Vajra
From Longchenpa’s Treasury of the Supreme Vehicle1

ema kiri kiri | mashta bhali bhali | samita suru suru | kundhali masu masu | ekara suli bhatayé
| tsakira bhuli salayé | samunta tsaraya sughayé | bheta sana bhuku liyé | sakari dhukana
| matari betana | barali hisana | makharta kilanam | sambhara tameka tsamtapa | surya
bhatare pashanasa | ranabhiti saghu ralapa | masminsa guli tayapa | ghura ghura saga kharnalam
| nara nara ithar patalam | sirna sirna bhesa raspalam | bhundha bhundha cisha sakelam
| sasah | ririh | lilih | i ih | mimih | ra ra rah |
As explained in the Tantra of the Union of the Sun and Moon, this dharmatā song evokes the
wisdom of Samantabhadra in union. As for its meaning:2
makyepé na mingak ching
Without birth and so without cease,
dro dang ongmé küntu khyab
Not coming or going, but filling all,
dechen chö chok miyowa
Blissful dharma sublime and unmoving,
khanyam namdrol göpamé
Sky-like, freed and without stain,
tsawamé ching tenmé la
Rootless, and also without support,
nemé lenmé chö chenpo
Homeless, unattached, a dharma profound,
yedrol lhün nyam yangpa ché
Ever free, ever vast, equality effortless,
chingmé nampar trol mepa
Subject to neither bondage nor liberation,
khyab dal khang zang yé yö nyi
An ever present palace encompassing all,
khyab nyampa lé nam depa
Beyond the equivalence of logic and reason.
yang so che o namkhé ying
So vast, so grand, the space of the sky!
chö chen barwa nyidé kyil
Blazing dharma, the core of the sun and the moon,
lhün gyi drub dang ngönsum pa
Instant presence, now it’s so plain to see,
dorjé riwo pema ché
A mountain of vajra, a lotus so immense
nyima sengé yeshe lu
The sun, a lion, this wisdom song.
dra chen rolmo tsungpamé
A sound so great, a music beyond compare,
namkhé ta la longchö pa
A pleasure reaching to the ends of space,
sangye sangye kün nyam shying
A buddha equal to all of the buddhas,
kunzang yangpa chö kyi tsé
Samantabhadra the vast, the peak of the dharma,
khaying zangmö ying rum du
In the womb of Samantabhadrī, her sky-like space,
longsal lhündrub yé dzok ché
Open clarity, instantly present—the ever great perfection!

Sing this while remaining within the all-pervasive expanse of mind’s nature.

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations (trans. by Peter Woods and Stefan Mang), 2018.
↑ The following famous prayer has been extracted from Longchenpa’s explanation of Vajra Song
and Dance (rdo rje’i glu gar) given in The Treasury of the Supreme Vehicle (theg mchog mdzod).↑
As stated by Longchenpa, the original source of this mantra is The Tantra of the Union
of the Sun and Moon (nyi zla kha sbyor), one of the Seventeen Tantras of the Category
of Pith Instructions. Namkhai Norbu Rinpoche explains this mantra to be the naturally resonant
mantra of the Buddha Samantabhadra in the form of a vajra-song. Rinpoche stated that
the song was not written in Sanskrit, but rather in the ḍākiṇῑ script of Uḍḍiyāna. Rinpoche
points out that there are many different versions of this song. Rather than seeing one
as correct and the others as incorrect, Rinpoche explained that they should all be considered
as correct “because this teaching did not come from only one place or at only one time.”
Following the mantra, Longchepa added the following lines. For a general explanation of
the importance of this mantra, see: Chögyal Namkhai Norbu, “The Song of the Vajra is the
Very Essence,” in The Mirror 93 (July/August 2008), 2-3; for an explanation of the syllables
of this mantra, see: Namkhai Norbu, The Dzogchen Ritual Practices, trans. Brian Beresford
(London: Kailash Editions, 1991), 132-136; for its intonation, see: Ibid., 90-91.