The Spontaneous Sound of Uncontrived Song
A Lament Recalling the Great Guru of Oḍḍiyāna
by Khenchen Jigme Puntsok

emaho
Emaho!
gong shik tukjé ché nga trulwé ku
Turn your attention towards us, nirmāṇakāya master of great compassion!
khyen tsé nü sum tsungpa mepé jé
Lord of incomparable knowledge, love and power,
rigdzin tötreng tsal la solwa deb
Vidyādhara Tötreng Tsal, to you I pray:
chi nang sangwé barché ying su sol
Dispel outer, inner and secret obstacles into absolute space!
chö dang si kyi lektsok malüpé
Inspire us with your blessings to realize our aspirations
ré dré ngön du gyurwar jingyi lob
For all forms of dharmic and temporal excellence!
ngöntsé rangjung tsokyé dorjé nyi
In the past, when the King of Zahor tried
zahor gyalpö sön sek dzepé tsé
To burn you, the self-arisen Lake-born Vajra, alive,
jung shyi nöpa riktong gyen du shar
Harm from the four elements became an adornment of awareness and emptiness,
dang sil yenlak gyeden tso ü su
And in the midst of the clear, cool waters, complete with their eight qualities,
lo dré gyen gyi püpé chukyé khar
You appeared upon a water-born lotus ornamented with petals,
tsen dzok pejé dzepé kur nang tsé
In a dazzling form complete with all the signs and marks.
der khö jelön düpa gyatso yi
The king and the assembly of ministers could not withstand
depé yowa khong du ma shong né
The overwhelming onrush of faith and were instantly compelled
chitsuk dzalen dhare bagam tser
To join the lotus petals of their fingers
sor chü dab tong dal du mé par gyur
At the domes of Jālandhara at their crowns.1
detsé dü dang mutek langchen tsok
Then, when herds of elephant-like māras and tīrthika heretics
ngagyal gyakpé lü tob cher té té
Were rampant—their bodies bloated with vanity and pride
jor ngen nashyak ring du kyang tsana
And the long trunks of their evil actions reaching out—
khandro drakmo seng dong shyal gyi gor
Siṃhamukhā, the wrathful ḍākinī with the face of a lion,
si sum chikchar ngubpé é long né
Drew all three realms at once into her mouth,
hung pé dra yi tukdam gyü kulwé
And then, from the É expanse, invoked your wisdom mind with the sound of Hūṃ and Phaṭ.
düdul nyampa chenpö kur shyeng té
You assumed the form of a great subduer of demons, and
dzutrul lung rik ché der nönpo yi
Miraculously, with the sharp fangs and claws of scripture and reasoning,
pé gol ridak sepé zen la rol
Slaughtered opponents and feasted on their remains,
nyendrak ngarö si sum ral nyam jé
The roar of your renown rending the three worlds asunder.
detsé salar khöpé lha nam kyi
Then the devas who dwell above the earth
sengé dra drok chepé tsen solwé
Named you Senge Dradrok—Lion’s Roar,
chewé chewa ngönsum tenpa na
And when you displayed the full extent of your greatness,
nordzin bu mö trakpé matekpar
Even the daughter of the earth could not bear it2
dar shying khün dra drenpa shyindu gyur
And appeared to shake and groan at the challenge.
detar tsungmé maha guru yi
In this way, O incomparable Mahāguru.
shyi dang drakpö roltsé bumtrak kün
You assumed myriad guises, peaceful and wrathful, here,
dü chik ngompé né chok khyepar chen
And now that I celebrate the great good fortune
ngönsum mik gi gatön gyurwé kab
Of beholding this sublime and special place directly for myself,
yi kyi khyé'u chung gawé gar gyi drel
The infant of my mind dances about frantically in joy,
machö gu di drinpé lam né dol
And this uncontrived song bursts forth spontaneously from my throat.
kyab chok khyé kyi dro kham matongwar
Supreme source of refuge, until the realms of beings are emptied,
pendé trinlé dü lé mi yolwé
Do not neglect your commitment to bring benefit and happiness,
shyalshyé dorjé damcha kul lak na
And as we remind you of it and invoke this, your vajra promise,
tak dang tsenma nyurdu nangwar dzö
Cause the signs and marks of attainment swiftly to appear!
khyepar rangré khawa chenpa yi
For us inhabitants of the Land of Snows in particular—
kyabgön chok dang bang mi tadak kün
May all of us, sublime protectors and humble followers alike—
ma drö lo sem chik tu gyurwé ngang
Arrive, even without discussion, at a state of unity of mind,
nyintsen küntu orgyen jedren né
Remember you, Lord of Oḍḍiyāna, continuously day and night,
mengak dung yü drakpö böpa di
And call out to you in intense lamentation and despair—
tsé chen khyé kyi tangnyom jok pö dam
At this, will you whose love is so great remain unmoved?
da ni tukjé nüpé tsal chung la
Show us now the strength of your compassion and power!
möden dak la wangkur jingyi lob
Grant us, your devoted followers, empowerment and blessings,
tendzin shyabten tenpa chok chur gyé
Cause teachers to live long and the teachings to flourish in all directions,
dro kün dé shying chö la chöpa yi
And bring all positive aspirations for beings’ happiness
ré dré tadak ngön du gyurwar dzö
And practice of the Dharma readily to fulfilment!

At the supreme place renowned as Tso Pema, this arose spontaneously to Ngawang Lodrö Tsungmé,
and later the devoted disciple Namdrol transcribed it from an audio recording.3 May virtue
abound!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2019. With many thanks to Sean Price for his suggestions.
↑ Jālandhara appears in lists of sacred places but corresponds internally to the crown of the
head. The image here is therefore of joining the palms at the crown of the head in obeisance.↑
Nor ’dzin bu mo, an epithet of Sita.↑ The disciple named Namdrol here is Khenchen Namdrol
Tsering.