Upon Hearing the Fluted Speech of Kunzang Dechen Tsomo, Queen Mother of Sikkim

by Jamyang Khyentse Chökyi Lodrö

Oṃ svasti.Superior to all, with toenails like red lotusesAbove the jewel crests of devas, atop
all existence and peace,Lord of Sages, deity of deities, son of Śuddhodana,At the feet
of the King of the Śākyas, I pay homage.

Infinite knowledge concentrated in a luminous sphere,As enchanting as the lucent clouds of twilight,And
with fingers clasping the sword of wisdom—To Guru Mañjughoṣa, I bow down for evermore.


All the victorious ones' wisdom of discernmentWas directed towards the limpid surface of Sindhu
Lake,Where it wondrously arose upon the tip of a lotus stem—To the sovereign of the victorious,
Lake-born Vajra, I offer veneration.

They who wilfully embraced myriad forms of hardship,To draw along the precious golden chariot
of Dharma,And spread the complete teachings of Buddha far and wide—To the dharma-kings,
translators and scholars of the past, I bow down.

Were the kindness of these beings to take formThe whole earth itself could not contain its massAnd
the sky would also prove too limited a space,For it is unimaginable, inexpressible,
beyond example.

That the precious teachings remain even now,As no more than a painted lamp or moon's reflection,Is
due to the kindness of these sublime protectors.Reflecting on this time and again inspires
heartfelt tears.

Attached to their own position and hostile toward others,Those who would take the straight and
make it crooked,Are like savage and ferocious beasts lying in repose:They'll inflame their
own minds and ruin others' too.

To distinguish what is Dharma from what is notRequires the vision of all-knowing wisdomAs an
ārya freed from obscuration and impediment;It is not for the likes of ordinary individuals
to judge.

So now at this time of ever-increasing degenerationLet us cast aside sectarianism like unwanted
hay,Open the mind's eye to the teachings as a wholeAnd bring illumination through teaching
and practice.

May the heavenly garden of the ten fields of knowledge grow,And from the wish-granting tree
of sūtra and mantra,Heavily laden at its top with fruits of the supreme vehicle,May the boon
of twofold welfare manifest spontaneously.

May the sun, moon and stars of auspiciousness illuminate the heavens,The signs of auspiciousness
emblazon the environment of the earth,And the seven emblems of royalty manifest themselves
in between,So that auspiciousness pervades throughout the whole of space and time.

When the Queen Mother of Sikkim, Kunzang Dechen Tsomo, descendant of the Gazi clan, fluted her
melodious speech, Tsuklak Lungrik Nyima Mawé Senge wrote this in a mood of playful wonder.

| Translated by Adam Pearcey with the generous support of the Khyentse Foundation and Tertön
Sogyal Trust, 2020.