Upon Arriving at Yangleshö
A Song by Khenchen Jigme Phuntsok Rinpoche

gyal kun trinlé chik dü jampal ni pawo
O Mañjuśrī, brave hero, all Conquerors’ activities gathered in one,
nying ü shyönnu bumkü long kyil du shyuk né
Dwell in my heart’s center, the youthful vase body’s expanse,
chinlap yeshé chok gi nangwa dang drokpé
And let mind lineage’s1 realization descend with great power,
gong gyü tokpa powé chin chen dé pob shok
Bringing blessings of supreme wisdom’s light!

di na chö kün rig tong nyak chik tu dak té
Upon arriving at Yangleshö,2 place sacred and supreme,
khor dé chö la ré dok shyenpa kün drol né
Deluded, impure appearances dissolve like rainbow mist.
trulwa shikpé naljor kyi nyal shyik ché tsé
No mere divine forms, wrought by paths of effort;
zung pob lodrö go gya dü chik tu ché song
But definitive meaning I encounter, the magical net’s3 true face.

belyül yangleshö kyi né chok tu sön kab
Here all phenomena are pure as empty awareness alone,
madak trulwé nangwa ja trin shyin deng né
All hope and fear’s grasping to things of life’s round and beyond, released.
tsol ché lam gyi drubpé lha ku tsam minpar
When the delusion-destroying yogi rests in sweet repose,
ngé dön gyutrul drawé rang shyal dé jal jung
Eloquent wisdom’s hundred doors are in a moment disclosed.

tsé dir dé tob nyerwa khyimpa yi tsok dang
Happiness in this life is the goal lay folks seek,
chimé dé dré tsolwa rabjung gi kyewo
Happiness in the next, the fruit sought by monks—
ser drok tak drok ching ché nyampa ru duk shyin
Golden leash or rope leash, they bind all the same,
nyika ré dok trang lé gal tab rang ka'o
Both ways make it hard to cross cliffs of hope and of fear!

ngön shyik dra tar nangwa duk nga yi tokpa
The five poisoned thoughts that arose like foes before,
dé ring rik tong chenpö ngowo ru dak duk
Today are pure as the essence of great empty awareness,
dönmé ngalwé tün shyi trik chak dé bor né
Dropping the tiring, meaningless four sessions’ succession,
gyumé naljor kyipé malsa ru nyal dö
The illusory yogi wishes but to lie in a bed of joy.

ngön shyik né dir jampal loden dé choksé
They say here, long ago, Loden Choksé Mañjuśrī,4
chakgya chenpö rigdzin ngönsum du gyur ké
Manifested the vidyādhara of the great seal.5
data bu truk dak kyang pa jé su zin né
Now I, the son, have caught up to his father,
damngak shyen la rẃé düpa dé drol tal
Knotted hopes of further advice are undone, freed.

gyalsi dün gyi drang den düpa yi tsok nam
Seven in number gathered, same as royal treasures,6
pamé rigdzin gyüpé pam pab la rol dang
Enjoy a feast left by the line of vidyādharas past,
rigdzin nam shyi sa la khyung ding shyin drö dé
Soaring like garuḍas through the vidyādhara's four grounds,7
ta lé dro kün drenpé depön du gyur yong
Captains we’ll become, to guide all beings beyond bounds.

At the cave of Yangleshö in Nepal, Ngawang Lodrö Tsungmé proclaimed this crazed speech, and
it was written down by Khenpo Namdrol, whose life is the sublime radiance of learning, discipline,
and nobility. May the light of virtue and excellence blaze supreme!

| Lhasey Lotsawa Translations, 2017. (Translated by Peter Woods.)
↑ Refers to the “mind-to-mind”, or direct and unmediated transmission of the Dharma teachings.
This is an account of lineage specific to the Nyingma tradition; it begins with Samantabhadra
and includes the buddhas of the five families as well as the supreme nirmāṇakāyas known
as the Twelve Teachers. From there, the lineage continues to Garab Dorje as the “symbolic
lineage” through to the Padmasambhava, who passed on the teachings through the “oral
lineage” to his disciples.↑ Located in Pharping, Nepal, about an hour from central Kathmandu,
this place features a cave blessed by Guru Rinpoche’s practice and accomplishment.↑ This
refers to the Mahāyoga tantras, which establish the purity of appearances within the context
of the ground, path, and fruition.↑ Guru Padmasambhava took the name Loden Choksé (blo
ldan mchog sred) after synthesizing the Vajrakīla teachings along with Vimalamitra and
Śīlamañju while staying in Yangleshö. The Barché Lamsel prayer refers to Guru Rinpoche as
the Paṇḍita of Yangleshö, when invoking him as Mawé Sengé, Guru Rinpoche inseparable from
Mañjuśrī.↑ Guru Rinpoche’s life stories hold that he reached this level, also known as the
mahāmudrā vidyādhara, upon completing the practice of Yangdak Heruka combined with Vajrakīla
while staying in Yangleshö with his consort Śākyadevī.↑ These seven treasures refer to
the possessions of a Universal Monarch (cakravartin), are: the precious wheel, precious jewel,
precious queen, precious minister, precious elephant, precious steed, and precious general.
Khenpo Jigme Phuntsok is referring to the group who gathered to visit Yangleshö the
day this was written, seven in number including himself, according to Khenpo Sodargye.↑
The four grounds (or stages) are: the matured vidyādhara, the vidyādhara with power over life,
the mahāmudrā (great seal) vidyādhara, and the spontaneously accomplished vidyādhara.